= RoleModel

RoleModel is the framework agnostic, efficient and declarative way to do
(user) roles. Assigned roles will be efficiently stored as a bitmask
directly into your model within an configurable attribute.

It works like this:

  # given a User class with a roles_mask attribute
  require 'rubygems'
  require 'role_model'
  
  class User
    attr_accessor :roles_mask   # just for demo purposes
    # in real life this would usuallt be a persistent attribute,
    # e.g. if your User model is persisted in a SQL-DB add an integer
    # column named roles_mask to your users table -- just remove/replace
    # above attr_accessor line with whatever is needed for your
    # persistence solution

    include RoleModel
    
    # if you want to use a different integer attribute to store the
    # roles in, set it with roles_attribute :my_roles_attribute,
    # :roles_mask is the default name
    roles_attribute :roles_mask
    
    # declare the valid roles -- do not change the order if you add more
    # roles later, always append them at the end!
    roles :admin, :manager, :author
  end
  
  #
  # Test drive (check the RDoc or source for additional finesse)
  #
  
  >> u = User.new
  => #<User ...>
  
  # role assignment
  >> u.roles = [:admin]  # ['admin'] works as well
  => [:admin]
  
  # adding roles (remove via delete or re-assign)
  >> u.roles << :manager
  => [:admin, :manager]
  
  # querying roles...
  
  # get all valid roles that have been declared
  >> User.valid_roles
  => [:admin, :manager, :author]
  
  # ... retrieve all assigned roles
  >> u.roles # also: u.role_symbols for DeclarativeAuthorization compatibility
  => [:admin, :manager]
  
  # ... check for individual roles
  >> u.has_role? :author  # has_role? is also aliased to is?
  => false
  
  # ... check for multiple roles
  >> u.has_any_role? :author, :manager  # has_any_role? is also aliased to is_any_of?
  => true
  
  >> u.has_all_roles? :author, :manager  # has_all_roles? is also aliased to is?
  => false
  
  # see the internal bitmask representation (3 = 0b0011)
  >> u.roles_mask
  => 3
  
  # see the role mask for a certain role(s)
  >> User.mask_for :admin, :author
  => 5

Once you have included RoleModel, your model is perfectly fit to be used
together with a role-based authorization solution, such as
http://github.com/ryanb/cancan or
http://github.com/stffn/declarative_authorization .

== Installation

  gem install role_model

== Reasoning

Whenever I introduce a role-based authorization scheme into a project, the
code gets coupled somehow to the available roles. So it usually does not make
any sense to have a separate Role model stored within the database. This Role
model will contain a predefined set of roles anyhow -- changing that set will
need to be reflected within the authorization code. Putting the available
roles right into the model that actually uses them, makes things much easier
and efficient.

== Note on Patches/Pull Requests

* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with Rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a
  commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

== Credits

RoleModel is an implementation of the Role Based Authorization scheme
proposed by Ryan Bates
(http://wiki.github.com/ryanb/cancan/role-based-authorization).

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Martin Rehfeld. See LICENSE for details.
